probes::telnetIOSPing(3)    SmokePing    probes::telnetIOSPing(3)



NNAAMMEE
       probes::telnetIOSPing - Cisco IOS Probe for SmokePing

SSYYNNOOPPSSIISS
        *** Probes ***
        + telnetIOSPing
        packetsize = 56
        forks = 1

        ++ PROBE_CONF
        iospass = password
        iosuser = user
        target = 192.168.1.1
        source = 192.168.2.1
        psource = 192.168.2.129

DDEESSCCRRIIPPTTIIOONN
       Integrates Cisco IOS as a probe into smokeping.  Uses the
       telnet protocol to run a ping from an IOS device (source)
       to another device (target).  This probe basically uses the
       "extended ping" of the Cisco IOS.  You have the option to
       specify which interface the ping is sourced from as well.

OOPPTTIIOONNSS
       The iosuser, iospass, source, and target options are
       mandatory.

       The (optional) packetsize option lets you configure the
       packetsize for the pings sent.  The default size is 56.

       The (optional) forks options lets you configure the number
       of simultaneous remote pings to be run.  NB Some IOS
       devices have a maximum of 5 VTYs available, so be careful
       not to hit a limit.

       The source option specifies the IOS device to which we
       telnet.  This is an IP address of an IOS Device that
       you/your server:      1)  Have the ability to telnet to
            2)  Have a valid username and password for

       The target option specifies the device you wish to ping
       from your IOS Device.

       The (optional) psource option specifies an alternate IP
       address or Interface from which you wish to source your
       pings from.  Routers can have many many IP addresses, and
       interfaces.  When you ping from a router you have the
       ability to choose which interface and/or which IP address
       the ping is sourced from.  Specifying an IP/interface does
       not necessarily specify the interface from which the ping
       will leave, but will specify which address the packet(s)
       appear to come from.  If this option is left out the IOS
       Device will source the packet automatically based on rout-
       ing and/or metrics.  If this doesn't make sense to you
       then just leave it out.

       The iosuser option allows you to specify a username that
       has ping capability on the IOS Device.

       The iospass option allows you to specify the password for
       the username specified with the option iosuser.

IIOOSS CCOONNFFIIGGUURRAATTIIOONN
       The IOS device should have a username/password configured,
       as well as the ability to connect to the VTY(s).  eg:

           !
           username smokeping privilege 5 password 0 SmokepingPassword
           !
           line vty 0 4
            login local
            transport input telnet
           !

NNOOTTEESS
       RReeqquuiirreemmeennttss

       This module requires the Net::Telnet module for perl.
       This is usually included on most newer OSs which include
       perl.

       DDeebbuuggggiinngg

       There is some VERY rudimentary debugging code built into
       this module (it's based on the debugging code written into
       Net::Telnet).  It will log information into three files
       "TIPreturn", "TIPoutlog", and "TIPdump".  These files will
       be written out into your current working directory (CWD).
       You can change the names of these files to something with
       more meaning to you.

       PPaasssswwoorrdd aauutthheennttiiccaattiioonn

       You should be advised that the authentication method of
       telnet uses clear text transmissions...meaning that with-
       out proper network security measures someone could sniff
       your username and password off the network.  I may attempt
       to incorporate SSH in a future version of this module, but
       it is very doubtful.  Right now SSH adds a LOT of process-
       ing overhead to a router, and isn't incredibly easy to
       implement in perl.

       Having said this, don't be too scared of telnet.  Remem-
       ber, the original IOSPing module used RSH, which is even
       more scary to use from a security perspective.

       PPiinngg ppaacckkeett ssiizzee

       The FPing manpage has the following to say on the topic of
       ping packet size:

       Number of bytes of ping data to send.  The minimum size
       (normally 12) allows room for the data that fping needs to
       do its work (sequence number, timestamp).  The reported
       received data size includes the IP header (normally 20
       bytes) and ICMP header (8 bytes), so the minimum total
       size is 40 bytes.  Default is 56, as in ping. Maximum is
       the theoretical maximum IP datagram size (64K), though
       most systems limit this to a smaller, system-dependent
       number.

AAUUTTHHOORR
       John A Jackson <geonjay@infoave.net>

       based HEAVILY on probes::IOSPing by

       Paul J Murphy <paul@murph.org>

       based on probes::FPing by

       Tobias Oetiker <tobi@oetiker.ch>



1.35pre1                    2005-01-04   probes::telnetIOSPing(3)
